1. If $X$ is a topological space, $Y$ is a set and $f: X \to Y$ is a surjective function, then the **quotient topology on $Y$ determined by $f$** is the topology $\{U \subseteq Y : f^{pre}(U) \text{ is open in } X\}$. This is the finest topology on $Y$ that makes $f$ continuous.

2. We can think of quotient spaces from a slightly different perspective as well: if $X$ is a topological space and $\sim$ is an equivalence relation on $X$, then we could say the **quotient space on $X$ determined by $\sim$** is the set $X / \sim$ equipped with the quotient topology on $X / \sim$ determined by $q: X \to X / \sim$, the natural projection map that sends each point to its equivalence class.

3. If $f: X \to Y$ is surjective, then $(f, \mathcal{T})$ is called a **quotient map** if:

     - $f$ is continuous
     - $\mathcal{T}$ is the quotient topology on $Y$ determined by $f$

    Equivalent characterization: If $f: X \to Y$ is a surjective function, then $(f, \mathcal{T})$ is a quotient map iff for all $U \subseteq Y$, $U \in \mathcal{T}$ iff $f^{pre}(U) is open in $X$.

    Equivalently, surjective $f$ is a quotient map iff for all $C \subseteq Y$, $C$ is closed in $Y$ iff $f^{pre}(C)$ is closed in $X$. To see the equivalence, assume $f$ is a quotient map and $C \subseteq Y$ is closed. Then $Y-C$ is open, so $f^{pre}(Y-C) = X - f^{pre}(C)$ is open, meaning $f^{pre}(C)$ is closed. The converse is proved in a similar way.


4. For any quotient map $q: X \to Y$, the "characteristic property" holds: If $A$ is any space, any function $f: Y \to A$ is continuous iff $f \circ q: X \to A$ is. One direction is immediately true. For the other, if $f \circ q$ is continuous, then if $U$ is open in $A$, then $q^{pre}(f^{pre}(U))$ is open, so because $q$ is a quotient map we have $f^{pre}(U)$ open in $Y$.


5. For any function $f: X \to Y$ (where $X$ and $Y$ are any sets, this is now set theory), $U \subseteq X$ is said to be **saturated with respect to $f$** if $U = f^{pre}(f(U))$ (i.e. if $U$ is the entire preimage of its image). This means that the only points that $f$ maps into $f(U)$ are points in $U$.

    A set $U$ is saturated w.r.t. $f$ iff $U$ is a union of fibers. *Proof:* $U$ being saturated clearly implies that it's a union of the fibers of points in $f(U)$. Conversely, if $U$ is not saturated, there's at least one point $x \notin U$ such that $f(x) \in f(U)$, so the fiber of $f(x)$ is not contained in $U$, proving $U$ is not a union of fibers.

6. If $X$ and $Y$ are topological spaces and $f: X \to Y$ is a surjective function, then the following three conditions are equivalent:

 1. $f$ is a quotient map
 2. $f$ is continuous and maps saturated open sets to open sets
 3. $f$ is continuous and maps saturated closed sets to closed sets

    *Proof:* First, if condition (2) holds, then if $C$ is saturated w.r.t. $f$ and closed in $X$, then $X - C$ is open and also saturated. Since $f(X - C) = Y - f(C)$ (since $f$ is surjective), we have proved that $f(C)$ is closed. Hence (3) holds. Similarly, (3) implies (2).

    Now if $f$ is a quotient map, and $U \subseteq X$ is saturated and open, then $f^{pre}(f(U)) = U$ is open, so by the quotient map property we must have $f(U)$ open. Hence (2) holds.

    Conversely, if (2) holds, then for any $U \subseteq Y$, if $U$ is open then $f^{pre}(U)$ is (by continuity, an assumption of (2)), and if $f^{pre}(U) is open, it is by definition saturated so $f(f^{pre}(U))$ is open (since $f^{pre}(U)$ is saturated, open) in $Y$. But $f(f^{pre}(U)) = U because $f$ is surjective.


7. If we have

     - topological spaces $X, Y$
     - a closed subset $A$ of $Y$
     - a continuous map $f: A \to X$

    then consider the equivalence relation $\sim$ on $X \coprod Y$ generated by $(a, f(a))$ for $a \in A$. The quotient space $X \coprod Y / \sim$, denoted $X \cup_f Y$, is called an **adjunction space**, which results from **attaching $Y$ to $X$ along $f$**.
